docs: Controller sharding and horizontal scaling (#1444)
fluxcd/website: content/en/flux/cheatsheets/sharding.md

---

When Flux is managing tens of thousands of applications, it is advised to adopt
a sharding strategy to spread the load between multiple instances of Flux controllers.
To enable horizontal scaling, each controller can be deployed multiple times
with a unique label selector which is used as the sharding key.

What follows is a guide on how to bootstrap multiple controller instances and how to
shard the reconciliation of Flux resources using the `sharding.fluxcd.io/key` label.

## Bootstrap with sharding

At [bootstrap time](bootstrap.md), you can define the number of shards
and spin up a Flux controller instance for each shard.

First you'll need to create a Git repository and clone it locally, then
create the file structure required by bootstrap with:

```sh
mkdir -p clusters/my-cluster/flux-system
touch clusters/my-cluster/flux-system/gotk-components.yaml \
    clusters/my-cluster/flux-system/gotk-sync.yaml \
    clusters/my-cluster/flux-system/kustomization.yaml
```

Then you'll create a dedicated directory inside `flux-system` for each shard:

```sh
mkdir -p clusters/my-cluster/flux-system/shard1
touch clusters/my-cluster/flux-system/shard1/kustomization.yaml
```

> ### Configure controller sharding

Reviewer: I feel all these steps should rather be a numbered list. Alternatively enumerate the headings like `### 2. Configure controller sharding`

> In the `shard1` directory you can generate a set of controller deployments that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `shard1` directory generate a set of controller deployments that
```

        value: --storage-adv-addr=source-controller-shard1.$(RUNTIME_NAMESPACE).svc.cluster.local.
  - target:
      kind: Deployment
      name: kustomize-controller
    patch: |
      - op: replace
        path: /spec/selector/matchLabels/app
        value: kustomize-controller-shard1
      - op: replace
        path: /spec/template/metadata/labels/app
        value: kustomize-controller-shard1
  - target:
      kind: Deployment
      name: helm-controller
    patch: |
      - op: replace
        path: /spec/selector/matchLabels/app
        value: helm-controller-shard1
      - op: replace
        path: /spec/template/metadata/labels/app
        value: helm-controller-shard1
  - target:
      kind: Deployment
      name: (source-controller|kustomize-controller|helm-controller)
    patch: |
      - op: add
        path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/-
        value: --watch-label-selector=sharding.fluxcd.io/key=shard1
```

The above configuration will generate three deployments `source-controller-shard1`,
`kustomize-controller-shard1` and `helm-controller-shard1` all configured 
with `--watch-label-selector=sharding.fluxcd.io/key=shard1`.

> To enable these deployments at bootstrap, you need to add the `shard1` directory to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable these deployments at bootstrap, add the `shard1` directory to
```

the `clusters/my-cluster/flux-system/kustomization.yaml` resources:

```yaml
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization
resources:
- gotk-components.yaml
- gotk-sync.yaml
- shard1
patches:
  - target:
      kind: Deployment
      name: "(source-controller|kustomize-controller|helm-controller)"
      annotationSelector: "sharding.fluxcd.io/role notin (shard)"
    patch: |
      - op: add
        path: /spec/template/spec/containers/0/args/0

>         value: --watch-label-selector=sharding.fluxcd.io/key notin (shard1, shard2)

Reviewer: For some reason there's trailing spaces at the end of this line in the rendered output.

```

> Note that you must exclude the sharding keys from the main controllers watch with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note how this configuration excludes the sharding keys from the main controllers watch with
```

```sh
git add -A && git commit -m "init flux" && git push
```

And run the bootstrap for `clusters/my-cluster`:

```sh
flux bootstrap git \
  --url=ssh://git@<host>/<org>/<repository> \
  --branch=main \
  --path=clusters/my-cluster
```

Verify that the main controllers and the ones assigned to shard1 are running:

```console
$ kubectl -n flux-system get deployments 

NAME                          READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
helm-controller               1/1     1            1           1m
helm-controller-shard1        1/1     1            1           1m
kustomize-controller          1/1     1            1           1m
kustomize-controller-shard1   1/1     1            1           1m
notification-controller       1/1     1            1           1m
source-controller             1/1     1            1           1m
source-controller-shard1      1/1     1            1           1m
```

When upgrading Flux, either by rerunning bootstrap with a newer version or
by using the [Flux GitHub Actions](https://github.com/fluxcd/flux2/tree/main/action),
the sharded controllers will be automatically upgraded along with the main ones.

## Assign resources to shards

> To assign a group of Flux resources to a particular shard, you need to label

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To assign a group of Flux resources to a particular shard, label
```

them with `sharding.fluxcd.io/key`.

For example, assuming you want to assign the reconciliation of an application

> to the `shard1` controllers, you can label both the Flux source and its Kustomization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the `shard1` controllers, label both the Flux source and its Kustomization
```

(i.e. `HelmChart` on a `HelmRepository`) need to have the same labels
applied to work as expected.

For example, assuming you want to assign the reconciliation of a Helm release
to the `shard1` controllers, you can label the HelmRelease, its chart and its repository
with `sharding.fluxcd.io/key: shard1`:

```yaml
apiVersion: source.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta2
kind: HelmRepository
metadata:
  name: podinfo
  namespace: default
  labels:
    sharding.fluxcd.io/shard: shard1
spec:
  interval: 10m
  type: oci
  url: oci://ghcr.io/stefanprodan/charts
---
apiVersion: helm.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v2beta1
kind: HelmRelease
metadata:
  name: podinfo
  namespace: default
  labels:
    sharding.fluxcd.io/key: shard1
spec:
  interval: 10m
  chart:
    metadata:
      labels:
        sharding.fluxcd.io/key: shard1
    spec:
      chart: podinfo
      sourceRef:
        kind: HelmRepository
        name: podinfo
```

Note that with `.spec.chart.metadata.labels` we set the shading key on the
generated Flux `HelmChart` object, so that both the Helm repository and charts
are managed by source-controller-shard1 instance.

### Bulk assign shards

> Instead of manual labeling each Flux resource with a shard key, you can use a top level

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of manual labeling each Flux resource with a shard key, use a top-level
```

Flux Kustomization and automatically label all resources.

For example, assuming you want to assign a tenant to a particular shard, in the
root Flux Kustomization that reconcile the tenant's Flux sources, kustomizations and

> Helm releases you can label these resources as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Helm releases label these resources as follows:
```
